docs/PILOT_PROOF.md, before:

# Pilot Proof Mode (v0.2.3+)

PayFlux includes a minimal pilot proof system for capturing "warning → outcome" evidence during a 90-day pilot.

## Overview

When enabled, pilot mode provides:
- **Warning records** for elevated+ risk events
- **Outcome annotation endpoint** for event-driven capture
- **Minimal dashboard** for pilot champions
- **Prometheus metrics** for outcome tracking
- **Stdout proof capture** for log pipeline persistence

## Enabling Pilot Mode

```bash
PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE=true
```

When enabled, PayFlux will:
1. Create in-memory warning records for events with `processor_risk_band` ∈ {elevated, high, critical}
2. Register pilot routes (auth required)
3. Emit pilot outcome annotations to stdout

## Pilot Routes

All routes require the same `Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>` header as the ingest endpoint.

| Route | Method | Description |
|-------|--------|-------------|
| `/pilot/dashboard` | GET | HTML dashboard with outcome annotation |
| `/pilot/warnings` | GET | JSON list of recent warnings |
| `/pilot/warnings/{id}` | GET | Single warning by ID |
| `/pilot/warnings/{id}/outcome` | POST | Set outcome for a warning |

## Outcome Annotation

### Endpoint
```
POST /pilot/warnings/{warning_id}/outcome
Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>
Content-Type: application/json
```

### Request Body
```json
{
  "outcome_type": "throttle",
  "observed_at": "2026-01-11T08:00:00Z",
  "source": "manual",
  "notes": "Processor reduced approval rate by 15%"
}
```

### Outcome Types
| Type | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `throttle` | Processor throttled transaction volume |
| `review` | Account flagged for manual review |
| `hold` | Funds or account placed on hold |
| `auth_degradation` | Approval rates declined |
| `rate_limit` | Transaction rate limiting applied |
| `other` | Other observed outcome |
| `none` | No outcome observed (marks as not-observed) |

### Example curl
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/pilot/warnings/1768097434029-0/outcome \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer your-api-key" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"outcome_type": "throttle", "observed_at": "2026-01-11T08:30:00Z", "source": "manual", "notes": "15% approval rate drop"}'
```

### Outcome Sources
| Source | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `manual` | Manual annotation via dashboard or API (default) |
| `stripe_webhook` | Outcome detected via Stripe webhook |
| `adyen_webhook` | Outcome detected via Adyen webhook |
| `other_webhook` | Outcome detected via other webhook integration |
| `other` | Other source |

## Proof Capture

When an outcome is set, PayFlux emits a JSON line to stdout:

```json
{
  "type": "pilot_outcome_annotation",
  "warning_id": "1768097434029-0",
  "event_id": "550e8400-...",
  "processor": "stripe",
  "risk_band": "high",
  "risk_score": 0.72,
  "warning_at": "2026-01-11T08:00:00Z",
  "outcome_type": "throttle",
  "outcome_timestamp": "2026-01-11T08:30:00Z",
  "outcome_source": "manual",
  "outcome_notes": "15% approval rate drop",
  "lead_time_seconds": 1800,
  "annotated_at": "2026-01-11T08:31:00Z"
}
```

This can be shipped via Vector/Fluent Bit to persist pilot evidence even if the process restarts.

## Prometheus Metrics

| Metric | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `payflux_warning_outcome_set_total{outcome_type,source}` | Counter | Outcomes annotated by type and source |
| `payflux_warning_outcome_lead_time_seconds` | Histogram | Time between warning and outcome |

## Storage

**Pilot mode uses in-memory storage only:**
- Cap: 1000 warnings (LRU eviction)
- Lifetime: process restart clears storage
- Redis persistence: not implemented (pilot scope)

This is intentional for pilot simplicity. Proof capture via stdout ensures no data loss.

## Guardrails

> [!IMPORTANT]
> - Labels use "**Observed Outcome**" — not "Caused Outcome"
> - No causal claims — only "outcome observed after warning"
> - No recommendations — champions decide their own actions
> - Language remains probabilistic for Tier 2 context

## Security

> [!NOTE]
> All `/pilot/*` routes require API key authentication via `Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>` header.
> Unauthenticated requests return 401.

## Pilot Workflow

1. Enable pilot mode: `PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE=true`
2. Run PayFlux with Vector shipping logs to your data warehouse
3. Access `/pilot/dashboard` with your API key
4. When processor outcomes occur, annotate them immediately
5. After 90 days, analyze `pilot_outcome_annotation` events for proof

## Verification Suite

PayFlux includes a full-flow verification script at `scripts/verify_pilot.sh`. Run it from the repository root:

```bash
./scripts/verify_pilot.sh
```

### Checkpoints

| Checkpoint | What it validates |
|------------|-------------------|
| **A: False-Negative** | Bad patterns (retry storms, failure spikes) emit warnings |
| **B: Tier 1 Schema** | Gated keys (`processor_playbook_context`, `risk_trajectory`) never appear in Tier 1 |
| **C: Metrics Stability** | Metric names and label keys unchanged across container restart |
| **D: Pilot Containment** | `/pilot/*` routes return 404 when `PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE=false` |
| **E: Log Redaction** | No secrets, API keys, or raw payloads in logs |
| **F: Language Audit** | No overclaiming terminology in docs |
| **G: False Positive** | Normal traffic (successful payments) does NOT generate warnings |

### Verification Report

On success, a machine-readable report is generated:
- Location: `verification-reports/verification-report-<timestamp>.json`
- Contents: timestamp, git commit hash, pass/fail per checkpoint

### What a Passing Run Guarantees

A passing verification run confirms:
- Risk scoring correctly distinguishes bad patterns from normal traffic
- Tier 1 exports do not leak Tier 2 fields
- Pilot routes respect the `PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE` setting
- Logs are safe for observability pipelines (no secrets)
- Documentation does not make unsupported claims

It does **not** guarantee:
- Correctness of risk thresholds for specific use cases
- Behavior under production load
- External system integration correctness

## Future Enhancements (Not Implemented)

- Redis-backed persistent warning storage
- Lead time dashboards and trend analysis
- Automated webhook outcome detection

Commit message:

docs: clarify metrics stability definition
Metrics stability refers to metric names and label sets, not counter values.
Counter values are expected to reset across restarts.

docs/PILOT_PROOF.md, after:

# Pilot Proof Mode (v0.2.3+)

PayFlux includes a minimal pilot proof system for capturing "warning → outcome" evidence during a 90-day pilot.

## Overview

When enabled, pilot mode provides:
- **Warning records** for elevated+ risk events
- **Outcome annotation endpoint** for event-driven capture
- **Minimal dashboard** for pilot champions
- **Prometheus metrics** for outcome tracking
- **Stdout proof capture** for log pipeline persistence

## Enabling Pilot Mode

```bash
PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE=true
```

When enabled, PayFlux will:
1. Create in-memory warning records for events with `processor_risk_band` ∈ {elevated, high, critical}
2. Register pilot routes (auth required)
3. Emit pilot outcome annotations to stdout

## Pilot Routes

All routes require the same `Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>` header as the ingest endpoint.

| Route | Method | Description |
|-------|--------|-------------|
| `/pilot/dashboard` | GET | HTML dashboard with outcome annotation |
| `/pilot/warnings` | GET | JSON list of recent warnings |
| `/pilot/warnings/{id}` | GET | Single warning by ID |
| `/pilot/warnings/{id}/outcome` | POST | Set outcome for a warning |

## Outcome Annotation

### Endpoint
```
POST /pilot/warnings/{warning_id}/outcome
Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>
Content-Type: application/json
```

### Request Body
```json
{
  "outcome_type": "throttle",
  "observed_at": "2026-01-11T08:00:00Z",
  "source": "manual",
  "notes": "Processor reduced approval rate by 15%"
}
```

### Outcome Types
| Type | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `throttle` | Processor throttled transaction volume |
| `review` | Account flagged for manual review |
| `hold` | Funds or account placed on hold |
| `auth_degradation` | Approval rates declined |
| `rate_limit` | Transaction rate limiting applied |
| `other` | Other observed outcome |
| `none` | No outcome observed (marks as not-observed) |

### Example curl
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/pilot/warnings/1768097434029-0/outcome \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer your-api-key" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"outcome_type": "throttle", "observed_at": "2026-01-11T08:30:00Z", "source": "manual", "notes": "15% approval rate drop"}'
```

### Outcome Sources
| Source | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `manual` | Manual annotation via dashboard or API (default) |
| `stripe_webhook` | Outcome detected via Stripe webhook |
| `adyen_webhook` | Outcome detected via Adyen webhook |
| `other_webhook` | Outcome detected via other webhook integration |
| `other` | Other source |

## Proof Capture

When an outcome is set, PayFlux emits a JSON line to stdout:

```json
{
  "type": "pilot_outcome_annotation",
  "warning_id": "1768097434029-0",
  "event_id": "550e8400-...",
  "processor": "stripe",
  "risk_band": "high",
  "risk_score": 0.72,
  "warning_at": "2026-01-11T08:00:00Z",
  "outcome_type": "throttle",
  "outcome_timestamp": "2026-01-11T08:30:00Z",
  "outcome_source": "manual",
  "outcome_notes": "15% approval rate drop",
  "lead_time_seconds": 1800,
  "annotated_at": "2026-01-11T08:31:00Z"
}
```

This can be shipped via Vector/Fluent Bit to persist pilot evidence even if the process restarts.

## Prometheus Metrics

| Metric | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `payflux_warning_outcome_set_total{outcome_type,source}` | Counter | Outcomes annotated by type and source |
| `payflux_warning_outcome_lead_time_seconds` | Histogram | Time between warning and outcome |

## Storage

**Pilot mode uses in-memory storage only:**
- Cap: 1000 warnings (LRU eviction)
- Lifetime: process restart clears storage
- Redis persistence: not implemented (pilot scope)

This is intentional for pilot simplicity. Proof capture via stdout ensures no data loss.

## Guardrails

> [!IMPORTANT]
> - Labels use "**Observed Outcome**" — not "Caused Outcome"
> - No causal claims — only "outcome observed after warning"
> - No recommendations — champions decide their own actions
> - Language remains probabilistic for Tier 2 context

## Security

> [!NOTE]
> All `/pilot/*` routes require API key authentication via `Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>` header.
> Unauthenticated requests return 401.

## Pilot Workflow

1. Enable pilot mode: `PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE=true`
2. Run PayFlux with Vector shipping logs to your data warehouse
3. Access `/pilot/dashboard` with your API key
4. When processor outcomes occur, annotate them immediately
5. After 90 days, analyze `pilot_outcome_annotation` events for proof

## Verification Suite

PayFlux includes a full-flow verification script at `scripts/verify_pilot.sh`. Run it from the repository root:

```bash
./scripts/verify_pilot.sh
```

### Checkpoints

| Checkpoint | What it validates |
|------------|-------------------|
| **A: False-Negative** | Bad patterns (retry storms, failure spikes) emit warnings |
| **B: Tier 1 Schema** | Gated keys (`processor_playbook_context`, `risk_trajectory`) never appear in Tier 1 |
| **C: Metrics Stability** | Metric names and label keys unchanged across container restart |

> Metrics stability refers to metric names and label sets, not counter values. Counter values are expected to reset across restarts.

| **D: Pilot Containment** | `/pilot/*` routes return 404 when `PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE=false` |
| **E: Log Redaction** | No secrets, API keys, or raw payloads in logs |
| **F: Language Audit** | No overclaiming terminology in docs |
| **G: False Positive** | Normal traffic (successful payments) does NOT generate warnings |

### Verification Report

On success, a machine-readable report is generated:
- Location: `verification-reports/verification-report-<timestamp>.json`
- Contents: timestamp, git commit hash, pass/fail per checkpoint

### What a Passing Run Guarantees

A passing verification run confirms:
- Risk scoring correctly distinguishes bad patterns from normal traffic
- Tier 1 exports do not leak Tier 2 fields
- Pilot routes respect the `PAYFLUX_PILOT_MODE` setting
- Logs are safe for observability pipelines (no secrets)
- Documentation does not make unsupported claims

It does **not** guarantee:
- Correctness of risk thresholds for specific use cases
- Behavior under production load
- External system integration correctness

## Future Enhancements (Not Implemented)

- Redis-backed persistent warning storage
- Lead time dashboards and trend analysis
- Automated webhook outcome detection
